---
layout: post
title: A Non-exhaustive List of Advice
categories: [teaching]
comments: true
---

This is a list of pieces of advice I offer to students (particularly, but not exclusively, those writing assignments for me). I'll update it as I think of things to add.

### Seek Advice
Tutors would far rather meet you and discuss your plans for an assignment than read something which does not meet their expectations - and which they therefore have to 'fail' or give a reduced grade to. Find out how to contact your tutor, arrange to meet to discuss your plan, take notes and then follow them as best you can.

### Reference Correctly
We ask you to use a version of the Harvard system in presenting references, but whatever guidance you a given, **use it**. You have to present your references correctly and failing to do so is just throwing marks away.

### Careful with Description
Most of the time you are not required to give description or to define (commonly used) terms. Ususally, the assignment brief will clarify this, but if you have any doubts then **check**. If you produce descriptive work in an assignment that requires analytical or evaluative work then you will limit your grade.

### Reference to Add Weight
References are important as a way to show when you have used the work of others in formulating your argument. They are also valuable as a way to help 'add weight' (make more convincing) the arguments that you are presenting. Think of it this way - without a reference it is just your opinion; with a reference, you are recruiting people to your team, it is no longer just your idea, you have others who are standing there with you. (Of course, there are other ways to strengthen an argument, but this is a common, fairly easy method).

### Read and Use Feedback
Make sure that you are using the feedback from past assignments to help you. It might help to make notes of themes that you see in feedback (remember to look at both in-text comments and summary notes). If you are not sure how to use feedback in a future piece of work then please ask - your tutor will certainly help you. Don't forget, you should also make note of the things that you do well - you will want to talk about those in interviews.

### Simple Language, Complex Ideas
It's important that your writing is easy to understand. Avoid trying to sound 'academic' by selecting over-complicated words that might not sound right. Opt for simple, short, sentences which allow you to focus on content. You can still present complex arguments even if your do not use long words. Be very careful about using a thesaurus - it can make your writing seem artificial and can ruin the flow.
